Abstract
Affiliated-transaction-based tax evasion (ATTE) is a new strategy in tax evasion that is carried out via legal-like transactions between a group of companies that have heterogeneous, complex and covert interactive relationships to evade taxes. Existing studies cannot effectively detect ATTE behaviors since (i) they perform well only for determining the abnormal financial status of individuals and ineffectively address the interactive relationships among companies, (ii) they aim at detecting ATTE from the perspective of structural characteristics, which leads to a poor false-positive rate, and (iii) few of them perform well in most sectors of companies. Effectively detecting suspicious groups according to both structural characteristics of ATTE groups and business characteristics of ATTE means (BC-ATTEM) remains an open issue. In this paper, we propose an affiliated-parties interest-related network (APIRN) for modeling affiliated parties, interest-related relationships, and their properties for identifying ATTE. Then, we identify the behavioral patterns of ATTE via topological pattern abstraction from APIRN and theoretical inference of BC-ATTEM. Based on the above, we further propose a hybrid method, namely, 3TI, for identifying ATTE suspicious groups via three steps: tax rate differential detection, topological pattern matching and tax burden abnormality identification. Experimental tests that are based on two years of real-world tax data from a province in China demonstrate that 3TI can identify ATTE suspicious groups with higher accuracy and better generality than existing works. Moreover, we identify various interesting implications and provide useful guidance for ATTE inspection based on an analysis of our experimental results.




1. Introduction
Tax is one of the most important types of fiscal revenue and a means with which the government can regulate the allocation of financial resources and income distribution [18, 11, 15, 17, 38]. However, countless businesses, especially giant corporations with layered subsidiaries, attempt to lower their taxable income and shield more of their hard-earned money from the tax administration. In practice, there are two possible ways to pay less in taxestax avoidance and tax evasion. Although they sound similar, they differ in terms of the procedures that are employed. Tax avoidance is the legitimate minimization of taxes via methods that are specified in the tax law. In contrast, tax evasion is an illegal practice of reducing taxes by not reporting income, reporting expenses that are not legally allowed, or not paying individually owed taxes, which causes a significant loss of national revenue [43]. The phenomenon of tax evasion is particularly severe in developing countries and, thus, has attracted the attention of tax authorities for a long time [11]. For example, it was reported that tax revenue loss in China accounted for 9.99% of its gross national product ($9 trillion) in 2013 [26].
For confronting this serious tax revenue loss, the Chinese government implemented a series of tax auditing measures, including manual case selection, whistle-blowing-based selection [9] and computer-based case selection (such as financial statement cross-matching [43] and abnormal financial index screening [30]). As a result of the use of these methods, traditional tax evasion behaviors, such as writing false value-added tax invoices, fake invoices and account manipulations, have been reduced significantly [39].
In recent years, a new type of tax evasion appeared: companies work together to conceal assets, income or information to dodge liability through affiliated transactions (ATs) [39], which is called affiliated-transaction-based tax evasion (ATTE). This type of evasion is carried out via “licit” transactions between companies that have heterogeneous, complex and covert interactive relationships, such as an interlocking shareholding relationship between companies’ shareholders or a kinship between companies’ legal representatives. These relationships are diverse and used for interest transfer to evade taxes mainly via mispricing. Consequentially, a substantial amount of tax revenue loss has been caused by ATTE. According to the statistics of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), a conservative estimate of tax revenue loss due to ATTE in developing countries is approximately 4.4% of the total tax revenue in the entire developing world in 2016 [40]. At present, tax authorities are equipped with limited resources for solving the problem of ATTE. Traditional tax auditing measures are typically time-consuming with tedious processes [39]; thus, they are not feasible for detecting ATTE.
Worse, for ATTE detection in China, a huge volume of transactions and their related data must be considered. For example, there are more than 450 million taxpayers and 37,000 taxation administration offices in the country.
The number of annual tax-related monthly financial reports has reached 2.5 billion, the daily peak number of transaction records has reached 2 billion, and the volume of aggregated annual data is 200 TB, which is considered big data. This volume of data further challenges traditional tax evasion detection methods.
Effectively detecting ATTE in a technical manner, especially identifying ATTE suspicious groups transactions from large-scale business transactions and related data, is a challenging issue and has attracted substantial attention in recent years. Current research on ATTE detection can be classified into two categories: the machine-learning-based auditing method (MLAM) [29, 28] and the graph-based auditing method (GAM) [39, 40]. MLAM enables the extraction and generation of knowledge from large volumes of tax data to detect and characterize ATTE behaviors and improve the efficiency of identifying problematic individuals, while GAM focuses on collecting sophisticated organizational structures of ATTE cases to identify the structural characteristics of ATTE groups. MLAM can detect the abnormal financial status of individuals with high accuracy and efficiency; however, it becomes helpless when facing heterogeneous, complex and covert interactive relationships and cannot detect ATTE groups. Meanwhile, its trained models are typically sensitive to the training data. The results of MLAM are not intuitive and cannot provide a clear explanation of ATTE behaviors. In contrast, GAM can detect suspicious groups that exhibit the structural characteristics of ATTE. However, it neglects the business characteristics of tax evasion techniques, such as referred abnormal financial status, which is verified by tax authorities and vital for ATTE detection. Detecting ATTE based on only structural characteristics could lead to a high false-positive rate. Few methods in the literature can realize the advantages of both MLAM and GAM in ATTE detection. In addition, Existing solutions seldom perform well in identifying ATTE in most sectors of companies.
In this paper, we propose a novel approach for effectively identifying suspicious groups that exhibit both the structural and business characteristics of ATTE via a uniform detection process. First, we present an affiliatedparties interest-related network (APIRN) for characterizing essential data items for ATTE detection. Then, we identify the behavioral patterns of ATTE by extracting structural characteristics from APIRN and theoretically inferring business characteristics of ATTE means (BC-ATTEM) based on evidence. Based on the behavioral patterns, we further propose a hybrid method, namely 3TI, for identifying ATTE suspicious groups. It consists of three steps: tax rate differential detection, topological pattern matching and tax burden abnormality identification. To evaluate the effectiveness of 3TI, experiments that are based on the real-world tax data of one province in China from 2014 to 2015 were carried out. The results demonstrate that 3TI outperforms existing methods in terms of accuracy.
3TI is original and differs substantially from the previous methods of ATTE detection. Typically, those methods extract the features of ATTE from structural characteristics of tax evasion groups or the abnormal financial statuses of individual taxpayers and detect ATTE via graph-based or machine learning techniques. 3TI, which is proposed in this paper, applies topological pattern matching, along with data fusion and inference based on evidence, to process heterogeneous tax data for the detection of ATTE groups based on both structural characteristics and business characteristics of ATTE. The main contributions of this paper can be summarized as follows:


(1) We aim at identifying ATTE suspicious groups by examining the heterogeneous, complex and covert interactive relationships and the business characteristics of tax evasion strategies that are involved in ATTE.
(2) We find that the properties of affiliated parties (APs) and interestrelated relationships (interactive relationships between APs, which are de noted as IRRs) are essential for detecting ATTE. Thus, we generate an APIRN that is based on a directed attributed multi-graph-based model [4] for characterizing APs, IRRs and their properties via heterogeneous network fusion.
(3) We propose a hybrid method, namely, 3TI, for detecting ATTE suspicious groups based on the abstracted behavioral patterns of ATTE, which integrates topological patterns with BC-ATTEM.
(4) We evaluate the performance of 3TI via comparison with existing works on a real-world big dataset. The results demonstrate that 3TI substantially improves the identification accuracy, is widely generalizable, and achieves lower false-positive and false-negative rates compared with existing methods. In addition, we discuss the implications of these results and provide useful guidance for ATTE inspection via analysis of our experimental results.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents a brief review of related works. In Section 3, we introduce key definitions and abbreviations that are used in the paper and describe the APIRN model.
Then, we propose the behavioral patterns of ATTE abstraction in Section 4, followed by the 3TI method for suspicious group identification in Section 5.
We present the experimental results and discuss additional implications and findings in Section 6. In Section 7, we further demonstrate the implementation of 3TI. Finally, our conclusions are presented in the last section.
2. Related Work
Many novel techniques for detecting financial fraud have been proposed in the literature. Most of them have been introduced in various comprehensive surveys [41, 7]. However, tax fraud research is still in its infancy. The techniques that are available for detecting tax fraud have various strengths and weaknesses.
The current mainstream ATTE detection methods fall into three categories: traditional tax auditing methods, machine-learning-based auditing methods and graph-based auditing methods. The traditional tax auditing methods carry out substantive audit procedures via cross-matching of financial statements or screening of abnormal financial indices. The machinelearning-based auditing methods identify ATTE patterns based on the attributes of taxpayers for detecting problematic individuals. The graph-based auditing methods focus on collecting sophisticated organizational structures of ATTE cases for finding the structural characteristics of ATTE groups.
2.1. Traditional Tax Auditing Methods
Manual case selection, whistle-blowing-based case selection and computerbased case selection are three frequently used methods of traditional tax auditing [39]. Manual and whistle-blowing-based case selection tasks are highly tedious and time-consuming and the effectiveness of these tasks heavily relies on the experience and skills of tax officers. In contrast, computer-based case selection is only used to facilitate manual case selection and focuses mainly on cross-matching financial statements [43] and screening abnormal financial indices [30]. Thus, via traditional tax auditing methods, addressing a large volume of taxation information in an efficient and effective manner is impossible. In practice, tax authorities are only able to screen a small percentage of tax reports for further auditing because of limited staff resources [24]. Thus, countering ATTE via traditional tax auditing methods is not feasible.
2.2. Machine-Learning-based Auditing Methods
To address the limitations of traditional tax auditing methods, machine learning techniques are frequently adopted to identify taxpayers who evade obligations [34]. Existing methods include association analysis [43, 33], cluster analysis [18, 30, 6, 42], classification [10, 27, 12, 21, 25, 28], simulation [5, 31, 36], and reinforcement learning [1, 19].
Association analysis. Wu et al. [43] employed association rules to a value-added tax database to uncover patterns and relationships among attributes that are useful for identifying tax evasions. Matos et al. [33] developed a method to mine frequent fraud patterns using association rules and rank taxpayers according to their potential to commit fraud.
Cluster analysis. Gonz´alez and Vel´asquez [18] adopted clustering algorithms, such as self-organizing map and neural gas, to identify taxpayer groups with similar behaviors. Assylbekov et al. [6] and Williams et al. [42] applied self-organizing maps to identify abnormal clusters with unusual behaviors that might carry out tax fraud. Liu et al. [30] used hierarchical clustering in tax inspection case selection based on seven financial indexes.
Classification. Chen and Cheng [10] proposed a hybrid model that combines a Delphi method and a rough set classifier to classify vehicle license tax payment. Junqu´e de Fortuny et al. [27] applied support vector machine and na¨ıve Bayes to detect residence frauds of taxpayers.
Simulations. Antunes et al. [5] used exploratory simulations and progressively deepening models of agents to study the reasons behind tax evasion. To generate aggregated patterns of tax behaviors, Noguera et al. [36] presented an agent-based model for the simulation of tax compliance by combining rational choices with social influence mechanisms.
Reinforcement Learning. Abe et al. [1] developed a constrained Markov decision process-based approach to the problem of optimally managing the tax, and more generally debt, collections processes at financial institutions. Goumagias et al. [19] described a Markov-based decision support model to predict behaviors of risk-neutral taxpayers and evaluate tax policies before implementation.
The above machine learning-based auditing methods partition taxpayers into “evasion” or “nonevasion” and achieve high accuracy and efficiency in individual tax fraud detection. However, none of these methods provide tax authorities with specific reasons for the classification; hence, each filling of an “evasion” taxpayer still must be manually examined by auditors. Meanwhile, they cannot identify the sophisticated organizational structures that are often created by tax evaders. To overcome this problem, it is necessary to identify an entire relationship network of tax evaders and detect their roles in it [14].
2.3. Graph-based Auditing Methods
Graph-based anomaly detection supports the investigation of sophisticated organizational structures of taxpayers. This type of method can be applied in diverse fields, such as detecting credit card fraud, calling card
and telecommunications fraud, health insurance claim errors, and securities fraud [2]. Recently, graph-based anomaly detection has been applied to the detection of tax evasion [27, 14, 8, 39, 40].
Dre˙zewski et al. used data from bank statements and the National Court Register to construct and analyze networks in an investigation into money laundering cases [14]. However, this approach only identifies the roles of offenders and the connections between them; it cannot detect detailed fraud schemes.
Tian et al. proposed a colored-network-based model, namely, the taxpayer interest interacted network (TPIIN), and an identification method for detecting tax evasion by building a pattern tree and matching component patterns [39]. In TPIIN, APs and IRRs are characterized via tags (represented by colors). However, it fails to describe the attributes of APs and IRRs, which, however, can represent identifiers for identifying tax evasion, as we discovered during our participation in tax auditing. In addition, this identification method does not take the tax evasion strategy into account.
Tselykh et al. presented an attributed-graph-based approach to the anomaly detection problem of identifying affiliated and interdependent entities that might be at risk for ATTE [40]. However, this work places too much emphasis on clustering analysis for attributes and graph connectivity properties analysis and pays little attention to the business characteristics of tax fraud, which leads to difficulty in explaining and tracing the derived results.
In summary, graph-based auditing methods can detect the sophisticated organizational structures of tax evaders. However, they neglect the business characteristics of tax evasion, thereby leading to high false-positive rates.
3. Definitions, Abbreviations and APIRN Model
First, we introduce the key tax knowledge that is involved in the design of the APIRN model as follows:
Definition 1. Affiliated Party (AP): If one party (natural person or company; a company is also referred to as a taxpayer in the field of taxation) is involved directly or indirectly in administration, control, capital contribution or investment in any form of influence on another party, then the two parties are defined as affiliated parties (APs) to each other [20]. In particular, if an affiliated party is a natural person, he or she is defined as an affiliated person. If it is a company, it is defined as an affiliated company.
Definition 2. Interest-Related Relationship (IRR): Any form of influence that includes but is not limited to administration, control, capital contribution or investment, as well as trading relationship, between APs is defined as an interest-related relationship (IRR).
Definition 3. Affiliated Transaction (AT): A business transaction between APs is defined as an affiliated transaction (AT) and the two companies that are involved in the AT are defined as AT companies.
Definition 4. Affiliated-Transaction-based Tax Evasion (ATTE): AT companies evade taxes by trading on mispricing based on the covert interactive relationships between them. This type of tax evasion is defined as affiliated-transaction-based tax evasion (ATTE).
Definition 5. Earnings Before Tax (EBT): The money that is retained by a company before the money that is due to be paid as taxes has been de ducted, which is calculated as the sales revenue minus the operating expenses and the cost of goods that have been sold [3, 32].
Definition 6. Corporation Income Tax (CIT): A direct tax that is imposed by a jurisdiction on the income or capital of a company, which is multiplied by the corporate tax rate to yield EBT [13, 22].
Definition 7. Net Profit (NP): A measure of the profitability of a company after accounting for all costs, which is calculated as CIT minus EBT [37].
Definition 8. Tax Burden Rate (TBR): The ratio of CIT to the company’s sales revenue, which is frequently used as a measure of the operating status of a company [35].
The primary strategy for identifying ATTE behaviors is to extract and model the data items that are involved in identification. Previous work focused on APs, IRRs and their categories but failed to describe the properties of APs and IRRs. By tracking and analyzing tax inspection cases and participating in tax audits, we demonstrate that both the properties of APs (e.g., location, industry sector, registration type and corporate tax rate) and the properties of IRRs (e.g., the tightness of an IRR, trading date and transaction amount) contribute significantly to ATTE identification in practice.
The tightness of an IRR indicates the degree of related interests of a direct tie, which is calculated according to various economic behaviors and social relations between APs, along with other impact factors.
Therefore, based on a directed attributed multigraph model [4], we propose an affiliated-party interest-related network (APIRN) for characterizing APs, IRRs and their properties for ATTE identification. The APIRN model
is described as follows:
(1) Each AP is treated as a node and the IRRs between APs are treated as edges.
(2) The category, location, industry sector, registration type and corporate tax rate of each AP are set as the properties of its corresponding node.
The category and tightness of each IRR and the trading date and transaction amount are set as the properties of its corresponding edge. The categories of IRRs include kinship relationship, interlocking shareholding relationship, shareholding relationship, legal representative relationship and trading relationship. Kinship relationship and interlocking shareholding relationship are abstracted as bidirectional edges and the others are represented by unidirectional edges.
Then, we formulate an APIRN as a quadruple:




















